closes #1188: an ADR on the trace format (#1190)
informalsystems/apalache: docs/src/adr/015adr-trace.md

- [Solution (Decision)](#solution)
- [Consequences (Retrospection)](#consequences)

## Summary

We propose a simple format for counterexamples (traces) in [JSON][]. Although
Apalache already supports serialization to [JSON][] in [ADR005][], it is a
general serialization format for all the constructs of TLA+ that are supported
by Apalache. This makes tool integration harder. It also make it hard to
communicate counterexamples to engineers who are not familiar with TLA+. This
ADR-015 contains a very simple format that does not require any knowledge of
TLA+ and can be easily integrated into other tools.

## Context

A TLA+ execution (called a behavior in TLA+) is a very powerful concept. It can
represent virtually any execution of a state machine, including sequential
programs, concurrent programs, and distributed systems. Counterexamples that
are produced by TLC and Apalache are just executions of a TLA+ state machine.
These counterexamples have two shapes:

 1. A *finite execution*, that is, a sequence of states.

 1. A *lasso execution*, that is, a finite sequence of states (prefix) followed
 by an infinitely repeated sequence of states (loop). Any infinite execution of

>  a *finite-state system* can be represented with a lasso.  (Not all executions
>  of infinite-state systems cannot be represented with a lasso.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 a *finite-state system* can be represented by a lasso.  (In general, executions
 of infinite-state systems cannot be represented by lassos.)
```

        @@ "W" :> { "m1_OF_PERSON", "m2_OF_PERSON" }

(* Transition 0 to State5 *)
State5 ==
  bank_of_boat = "W"
    /\ who_is_on_bank
      = "E" :> {}
        @@ "W"
          :> { "c1_OF_PERSON", "c2_OF_PERSON", "m1_OF_PERSON", "m2_OF_PERSON" }

(* The following formula holds true in the last state and violates the invariant *)
InvariantViolation == who_is_on_bank["E"] = {}

================================================================================
(* Created by Apalache on Wed Dec 22 09:18:50 CET 2021 *)
(* https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache *)
```

The above counterexample looks very simple and natural, if the reader knows
TLA+. In our experience, these examples look alien to engineers, who are not
familiar with TLA+. It is unfortunate, since the counterexamples have a very
simple shape:

 1. They are simply sequences of states.

 1. Every state is a mapping from variable names to expressions that do not
 refer to other variables.

 1. The expressions are using a very small subset of TLA operators:

   1. Integer and string literals.

   1. Set constructor, sequence/tuple constructor, record constructor.

   1. TLC operators over functions: `:>` and `@@`.

> In the hindsight, the above expressions are not very far from the JSON format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In hindsight, the above expressions are not very far from the JSON format.
```

As many engineers know [JSON][], it seems natural to write these counterexamples
in JSON.

> ## Options

Reviewer 2: Seems like the options here don't include the option you're proposing? I think that's valuable because it lets us clearly compare the pros and cons of the options not selected against the option which is.

Author: Fixed.

 1. Use the TLA+ format:

    - Pros:

      - easy to understand, if you know TLA+.

    - Cons:

      - quite hard to understand, if you don't know TLA+.
      - quite hard to parse automatically.

 1. Use the JSON serialization as in [ADR005][]:

    - Pros:

      - easy to parse automatically.

    - Cons:

      - almost impossible to read.
      - requires the knowledge of Apalache IR.

## Solution

In this ADR, we propose a very simple format that represents executions of
state machines that follows the concepts of TLA+ and yet avoids complexity of
TLA+. It is so simple that we call it *"Informal Trace Format"* (ITF).
(Obviously, it is formal enough to be machine-readable).  By convention, the
files in this format should end with the extension `.itf.json`.

### The ITF Format

> **Trace object**. A trace in TTF is a JSON object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Trace object**. A trace in ITF is a JSON object:
```

  "states": <array of states>,
  "loop": <optional int>
}
```

The field `#meta` is an arbitrary JSON object, whose purpose is to provide
the reader with additional comments about the trace. For example, it may look
like:

```js
  "#meta": {
    "description": "Generated by Apalache",
    "source": "MissionariesAndCannibalsTyped.tla"
  }
```

The optional field `params` is an array of names that must be set in the
initial state (if there are any parameters). The parameters play the same role
as `CONSTANTS` in TLA+. For example, the field may look like:

```js
  "params": [ "Missionaries", "Cannibals" ]
```

The field `vars` is an array of names that must be set in every state.
For example, the field may look like:

```js
  "vars": [ "bank_of_boat", "who_is_on_bank" ]
```

The field `states` is an array of state objects (see below). For example,
the field may look like:

```js
  "states": [ <state0>, <state1>, <state2> ]
```

The optional field `loop` specifies the index of the state (in the array of
states) that starts the loop. The loop ends in the last state. For example,
the field may look like:

```js
  "loop": 1
```

**State object**. A state is a JSON object:

```js
  {

>     "#meta": <optional object",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "#meta": <optional object>,
```

    "<var1>": <expr>,
    ...
    "<varN>": <expr>
  }
```

As in the trace object, the field `#meta` may be an arbitrary object.
Different tools may use this object to write their metadata into this object.

> The names `<var1>, ..., <varN>` are the names of the variables that are
> specified in the field `vars`. The syntax of `<expr>` is specified below.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The names `<var1>, ..., <varN>` are the names of the variables that are
specified in the field `vars`. Each state must define a value for every specified variable. The syntax of `<expr>` is specified below. 

```

**Expressions.** As usual, expressions are inductively defined. An expression
`<expr>` is one of the following:

 1. A JSON string literal, e.g., `"hello"`. TLA+ strings are written as strings
    in this format.

 1. A JSON integer, e.g., 123. According to [RFC7159][], JSON integers
    must be in the range: `[-(2**53)+1, (2**53)-1]`. Integers in this

>     range *may be* written as JSON integers.

Reviewer 2: As a potential use of this encoding, I don't like that some values just the literal JSON value, while others are inferred from a special encoding. I suggest instead just making every value of the form `{"#type": <type-name>, "#value": <value>}`.

Otherwise people writer deserializers have to look at each object and inspect it first to see if it's one of these special objects, by getting all keys, then checking for the presence of the special key, or if it's just a normal object (which is actually supposed to be interpreted as a TLA+ record). This ends up introducing two different dimensions of ambiguity: some json values are puns for certain TLA+ values, and some json values are actually special instructions that are meant to indicate an alternative interpretation.

I think you can make the format much more regular if instead every value is tagged, then the function to dispatch for deserialization can just be something like

```scala
def deser(o: Json): Tla = o.type match {
  case "#string" => Some(o.value)
  case "#int" => Option(o.value.toInt)
  case "#rec" => convertRecord(o.value)
  // ...
}
```

My main claim here is that requiring tags for some values but not others, and putting these tags each as their own dictionary key instead of assigning a single key to pull out tags, actually doesn't provide any simplification, it just makes things more irregular.

Author: I had the same feeling when writing this document. Actually, I wanted to keep JSON values only, but that seemed to be too much loss of information. We could make the values more regular; it's easy. However, I think that the priorities are different here:

1. Some of these traces may be written by hand, when people are developing their own tools. In this case, people would probably limit themselves to arrays and records.
2. When I am looking at the testing frameworks that we do for audits, the structure of the counterexamples is fixed, so we already know the shape of the states.

Reviewer 3: I agree with Shon here for what it's worth. The ADR looks good a whole

 1. A big integer of the following form: `{ "#bigint": "[-][0-9]+" }`.
    We are using this format, as many JSON parsers impose limits on
    integer values, see [RFC7159][]. Big and small integers *may be*

>     written in this format.

Reviewer 2: I'm slightly unsure about this complication, since it introduces two different ways of representing what should be, iiuc, understood as just a single kind of value. If any program that consumes this data is going to have to support bigints  anyhow, should we perhaps only have `{"#int":  "[-][0-9]+" }` as the supported value for integer-expressions?

Author: True. However, if we put focus on usability in this format, not on the easy of writing a parser, it makes sense to write small integers without typing too much.

Reviewer 2: Imo, this is a shortsighted view of usability. It’s optimizing for the simple case instead of regularity and generality. It means users have to study documentation and memorize which values get encoded which way and why.

in general, and I know I keep saying this, optimizing data exchange formats for human readability is a bad idea. If you want a readable view, just implement a small script to print a markdown table or a dot graph or an avg or whatever. 

Every time I’ve had to work with a data format where authors compromised the regularity of the machine encoding so that is has nice features as ascii art I’ve found it to slow me down and make things more tediuous (YAML in general is a great example).

Author: I see your point. However, we already have a perfect machine-readable format. I really hope that JSON fixes this issue of bounded integers in the future. For instance, TypeScript supports big integers, but they are not serialized into JSON very well.

Author: I have added a discussion on that, so we can come back to your point later :-)

 1. A list of the form `[ <expr>, ..., <expr> ]`. A list is just a
    JSON array. TLA+ sequences are written as lists in this format.

 1. A record of the form `{ "field1": <expr>, ..., "fieldN": <expr> }`. A
    record is just a JSON object. Field names should not start with `#`
    and hence should not pose any collision with other constructs.
    TLA+ records are written as records in this format.

>  1. A tuple of the form `{ "#tup": [ <expr>, ..., <expr> ] }`. There is no
>  strict rule about when to use sequences or tuples. Apalache differentiates
>  between tuples and sequences and it may produce expressions of the both forms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 1. A tuple of the form `{ "#tup": [ <expr>, ..., <expr> ] }`. There is no
 strict rule about when to use sequences or tuples. Apalache differentiates
 between tuples and sequences, and it may produce both forms of expressions.
```

        ]  
      }
    },
    {
      "#meta": { "index": 2 },
      "bank_of_boat": "E",
      "who_is_on_bank": {
        "#map": [
          [ "E", { "#set": [ "c1_OF_PERSON",
                             "m1_OF_PERSON", "m2_OF_PERSON" ] } ],
          [ "W", { "#set": [ "c2_OF_PERSON" ] } ]
        ]  
      }
    },
    {
      "#meta": { "index": 3 },
      "bank_of_boat": "W",
      "who_is_on_bank": {
        "#map": [
          [ "E", { "#set": [ "c1_OF_PERSON" ] } ],
          [ "W", { "#set": [ "c2_OF_PERSON", "m1_OF_PERSON", "m2_OF_PERSON" ] } ]
        ]  
      }
    },
    {
      "#meta": { "index": 4 },
      "bank_of_boat": "E",
      "who_is_on_bank": {
        "#map": [
          [ "E", { "#set": [ "c1_OF_PERSON", "c2_OF_PERSON" ] } ],
          [ "W", { "#set": [ "m1_OF_PERSON", "m2_OF_PERSON" ] } ]
        ]  
      }
    },
    {
      "#meta": { "index": 5 },
      "bank_of_boat": "W",
      "who_is_on_bank": {
        "#map": [
          [ "E", { "#set": [ ] } ],
          [ "W", { "#set": [ "c1_OF_PERSON", "c2_OF_PERSON",
                             "m1_OF_PERSON", "m2_OF_PERSON" ] } ]
        ]  
      }
    }
  ]
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: In contrast to the other format, it looks like this one does not include data about the invariant that was violated. It'd think that was important info. Should it be included?

Reviewer: A trace is a general concept, it doesn't have to come from a counterexample to an invariant.

Reviewer 2: That makes sense. But the main motivating force for this to report on counter examples, and those are used as the examples. So it seems like we should also account for how we’ll supply this data when needed, and probably make a clearer statement about this being a general form for traces which can be specialized to meet the needs of reporting counter examples. (Especially since this linked from our public docs).

Reviewer: Generally speaking, at least for the audit case, the invariant isn't referenced by any of the tools that consume counterexample traces. But since this is JSON, you're always allowed to add non-specified fields as you wish, it'd be easy enough to add a toplevel `"(violated) invariant" : expr` entry.

Author: This can go into `#meta`. I am thinking of this format as of a trace format, not being really specific to TLA+.

Reviewer 2: Adding info on this one way or another would help, even if just to say: "we don't actually need to include the invariant".

> Compare the above trace format with the TLA+ counterexample. The TLA+ example
> looks more compact. The ITF example is heavier on the brackets and braces.
> However, the example in the ITF format is self-explanatory and it does not
> require any dive in TLA+.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compare the above trace format with the TLA+ counterexample. The TLA+ example
looks more compact. The ITF example is heavier on the brackets and braces, but it is also designed with machine-readability and tool automation in mind, whereas TLA+ counterexamples are not. 
However, the example in the ITF format is also self-explanatory and does not
require any understanding of TLA+.
```

## Consequences

<!-- Records the results of the decision over the long term.
     Did it work, not work, was changed, upgraded, etc.
-->

> Nothing yet. However, we expect this format to become an exchange format
> for the tools that consume traces at their input:
> 
>  - End-to-end testing tools,
> 
>  - Bug reproduction tools,
> 
>  - Trace visualization tools,
> 
>  - Trace fuzzers.

Reviewer 2: This is space is for retrospection. And we can't retrospect at the outset! I suggest including list useful list in the intro instead, since this is bout motivation, not retrospective evaluation.

```suggestion
```
